>> Sreenivasan: ON THIS EDITION
FOR SATURDAY, APRIL 8: FALLOUT
FROM THE U.S. MISSILE STRIKE ON
SYRIA FOR USING CHEMICAL WEAPONS
ON ITS OWN PEOPLE-- WHERE DOES
THE CRISIS GO FROM HERE?; AND IN
OUR SIGNATURE SEGMENT, FROM
KENYA, A NEW KIND OF AID FOR THE
NEEDY-- GIVING OUT CASH WITH NO
STRINGS ATTACHED.
>> Reporter: GIVEDIRECTLY HAS
BEEN MAKING LUMP-SUM PAYMENTS TO
THE POOREST INDIVIDUALS IN KENYA
FOR YEARS, BUT WHAT WOULD HAPPEN
IF ENTIRE VILLAGES WERE
RECIPIENTS?
>> Sreenivasan: NEXT ON PBS
NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS AT
LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
HARI SREENIVASAN.
>> Sreenivasan: GOOD EVENING,
AND THANKS FOR JOINING US.
SYRIAN GOVERNMENT WARPLANES
TODAY RESUMED BOMBING THE SAME
TOWN HIT BY A CHEMICAL WEAPONS
ATTACK EARLIER THIS WEEK.
THAT ATTACK WAS IN VIOLATION OF
INTERNATIONAL LAW AND PROMPTED
AN AMERICAN MISSILE STRIKE IN
RETALIATION.
AT LEAST 87 PEOPLE HAVE DIED
SINCE SYRIAN PRESIDENT BASHAR
ASSAD UNLEASHED CHEMICAL WEAPONS
ON CIVILIANS IN THE REBEL-HELD
TOWN OF KHAN SHEIKHOUN IN THE
COUNTRY'S NORTHERN IDLIB
PROVINCE.
TODAY'S GOVERNMENT AIR STRIKES
WITH CONVENTIONAL BOMBS KILLED
AT LEAST TWO PEOPLE, ACCORDING
TO HUMAN RIGHTS GROUPS.
ELSEWHERE TODAY IN SYRIA, NEAR
RAQAA, THE DE FACTO CAPITAL OF
THE ISLAMIC STATE GROUP,
AMERICAN WARPLANES TARGETING
ISIS MILITANTS KILLED MORE THAN
20 PEOPLE.
TODAY IN FLORIDA, PRESIDENT
TRUMP SPOKE BY PHONE WITH SAUDI
ARABIA'S KING SALMAN.
THE WHITE HOUSE SAYS THE KING
REAFFIRMED HIS SUPPORT FOR
THURSDAY'S U.S. MILITARY ATTACK
ON A SYRIAN AIRFIELD, CALLING IT
"A NECESSARY RESPONSE."
SYRIAN OFFICIALS HAVE SURVEYED
THE DAMAGE, AND THE SYRIAN
MILITARY HAS ALREADY BEGUN
REUSING THE BASE.
WHILE TURKEY APPLAUDED THE
ATTACK, ASSAD'S KEY ALLIES--
RUSSIA AND IRAN-- CONDEMNED IT
TODAY, CALLING IT "BLATANT
AGGRESSION" TO SLOW "VICTORIES
BY SYRIA'S ARMY."
TODAY, IRANIAN PRESIDENT HASSAN
ROUHANI CALLED FOR AN IMPARTIAL
INTERNATIONAL COMMITTEE TO FIND
OUT WHERE THE CHEMICAL WEAPONS
CAME FROM.
DOZENS OF SYRIANS GATHERED
OUTSIDE THE UNITED NATIONS
OFFICE IN DAMASCUS TO PROTEST
THE U.S. MISSILE STRIKE.
IT WAS THE FIRST DIRECT AMERICAN
ATTACK ON THE ASSAD REGIME SINCE
SYRIA'S CIVIL WAR BEGAN SIX
YEARS AGO, A WAR THAT HAS
DISPLACED HALF OF THE COUNTRY'S
POPULATION AND CLAIMED MORE THAN
400,000 LIVES.
TO DISCUSS THE SITUATION IN
SYRIA, THE U.S. MILITARY ROLE
THERE AND THROUGHOUT THE REGION,
I'M JOINED BY DOUG OLLIVANT
FROM NEW AMERICA, IN WASHINGTON;
AND KIMBERLY MARTEN, FROM
COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY, HERE IN NEW
YORK.
DOUG, I WANT TO START WITH YOU.
IF THIS WAS A ONE-OFF INCIDENT,
HOW CONSEQUENTIAL IS IT?
>> WELL, IF IT'S A ONE-OFF THAT
IS DESIGNED WITH THE STRATEGIC
PURPOSE OF INFORMING NOT JUST
SYRIA BUT ALL REGIMES THAT THE
UNITED STATES HAS A ZERO
TOLERANCE POLICY ON THE USE OF
CHEMICAL WEAPONS AND OTHER
WEAPONS OF MASS DESTRUCTION,
THEN IT'S MAKING THAT POINT.
BUT IN TERMS OF THE SYRIAN CIVIL
WAR ITSELF AND U.S. POLICY IN
THE MIDDLE EAST, PROBABLY VERY
LITTLE.
>> Sreenivasan: KIMBERLY
MARTEN, THE CONCERN THAT
EVERYBODY HAS NOW IS NOT JUST
NECESSARILY WHAT SYRIA'S
RESPONSE, BUT WHAT'S BIG
BROTHER RUSSIA'S RESPONSE.
>> WELL, YOU KNOW, I THINK IT'S
NOT GOING TO BE AS BAD AS SOME
PEOPLE HAVE BEEN PREDICTING.
I THINK RUSSIA MUST HAVE BEEN
VERY EMBARRASSED BY SYRIA'S USE
OF CHEMICAL WEAPONS BECAUSE IT
REALLY UNDERCUT PUTIN'S ROLE
BACK IN 2013 IN SAYING HE HAD
HELPED GET RID OF SYRIA'S
WEAPONS.
AND WHAT'S TRULY STRIKING IS
THEY GOT HOURS OF ADVANCE NOTICE
OF THE STRIKE, AND THERE WERE NO
RUSSIANS KILLED AND NO RUSSIAN
HELICOPTERS HIT, BUT THERE WERE
SYRIAN SOLDIERS KILLED AND
SYRIAN AIRPLANES HIT.
AND I THINK THAT MIGHT BE AN
INDICATION THAT RUSSIA DIDN'T
TELL SYRIA THAT THE STRIKE WAS
COMING.
>> DOUG, WHAT ABOUT THAT?
IS THERE ENOUGH DAYLIGHT BETWEEN
SYRIA AND RUSSIA THERE, AT LEAST
ON THIS SPECIFIC ISSUE,
CONSIDERING HOW GEOGRAPHICALLY
IMPORTANT SYRIA IS TO RUSSIA'S
MILITARY PRESENCE IN THE MIDDLE
EAST?
>> WELL, CERTAINLY IN THE LARGER
PICTURE, SYRIA'S VERY IMPORTANT
TO RUSSIA, MUCH MORE IMPORTANT
THAN IT IS TO US, AND THEREFORE
THEY'RE VERY VESTED.
BUT I REALLY AGREE WITH
KIMBERLY'S ANALYSIS.
THE RUSSIANS HAD TO BE
EMBARRASSED BY THIS.
IT'S REALLY HARD FOR ME TO GET
MY HEAD INSIDE THE LOGIC OF THE
SYRIAN REGIME, WHY THEY WOULD DO
THIS, WHY THEY WOULD PROVOKE THE
INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY,
EMBARRASS THEIR PATRONS, THE
RUSSIANS.
THIS SEEMS TO MAKE NO SENSE TO
ME.
AND I TOTALLY AGREE WITH
KIMBERLY,IT'S NOT BEYOND THE
RUSSIANS TO LET THEM FEEL THE
BRUNT OF THE ATTACK SO THEY
DON'T DO SOMETHING LIKE THAT
AGAIN.
>> Sreenivasan: REX TILLERSON
IS SUPPOSED TO GO TO MOSCOW NEXT
WEEK.
HOW DOES THAT CONVERSATION GO?
>> WELL, YOU KNOW, PUTIN IS
SOMEBODY WHO REALLY RESPECTS
STRENGTH, AND I THINK THIS MIGHT
HAVE BEEN QUITE INTENTIONAL AS A
WAY OF SHOWING RUSSIA AND
SHOWING PUTIN IN PARTICULAR
THAT PRESIDENT TRUMP IS NOT
GOING TO TAKE LYING DOWN
WHATEVER IT IS THAT RUSSIA DOES
IN THE MIDDLE EAST.
AND WE SHOULD BE CONCERNED THAT
RUSSIA IS ALSO INCREASING ITS
MILITARY INFLUENCE IN EGYPT,
POTENTIALLY IN LIBYA, ALSO IN
AFGHANISTAN.
AND SO I THINK A MESSAGE OF
STRENGTH HERE IN SYRIA IS
SOMETHING THAT MIGHT ACTUALLY
BENEFIT TILLERSON IN GETTING A
GOOD DEAL IN MOSCOW.
>> Sreenivasan: DOUG, WHAT
ABOUT THAT INFLUENCE THAT RUSSIA
HAS BEEN INCREASING THROUGHOUT
THE MIDDLE EAST?
>> WELL, AS KIMBERLY POINTED
OUT, IT HAS-- IT HAS NOT HAD A
STRONG RELATIONSHIP WITH THE
THREE COUNTRIES SHE MENTIONED,
WITH AFGHANISTAN, WITH LIBYA,
WITH EGYPT.
IT'S CERTAINLY TRYING TO EXTEND
TENTACLES INTO THOSE REGIMES.
IT'S NOT THE SAME KIND OF
RELATIONSHIP THEY HAVE WITH
SYRIA, BUT CERTAINLY THEY'RE
STARTING TO EXPAND THEIR
INFLUENCE IN THE REGION.
I STILL MAINTAIN THIS STRIKE WAS
MUCH MORE ABOUT CHEMICAL WEAPONS
THAN ABOUT THE SYRIAN CIVIL WAR
OR RUSSIAN INFLUENCE OR ANYTHING
ELSE.
BUT IF THE RUSSIANS ARE
WILLING TO TAKE AWAY A MESSAGE
OF U.S. STRENGTH FROM THIS, I
CERTAINLY HAVE NO PROBLEM WITH
THAT.
>> Sreenivasan: KIMBERLY, THIS
WASN'T AN ISSUE ABOUT SORT OF
U.S. VERSUS RUSSIA, MORE
SPECIFIC, NOT EVEN ABOUT REGIME
CHANGE, BUT REALLY SPECIFICALLY
ABOUT CHEMICAL WEAPONS.
>> YES, IT WAS.
IT DID FOLLOW A DAY OF
DISCUSSION IN THE U.N. SECURITY
COUNCIL ABOUT WHAT HAD HAPPENED
IN SYRIA, AND SO IT WASN'T OUT
OF THE BLUE.
IT WAS CLEAR THAT THERE WOULD
NOT BE A U.N. SECURITY COUNCIL
RESOLUTION THAT CONDEMNED SYRIA
BECAUSE SYRIA IS RUSSIA'S ALLY,
AND RUSSIA HAS A VETO IN THE
U.N. SECURITY COUNCIL, BUT AT
LEAST THERE WAS AN ATTEMPT MADE
TO GET THE INTERNATIONAL
COMMUNITY THINKING ABOUT THIS.
AND IN FACT, WHAT WE SEE IS THAT
THE MAJORITY OF U.S. ALLIES ARE
ON BOARD BEHIND WHAT THE U.S.
DID.
>> Sreenivasan: THERE WAS ALSO
TALK THAT THE TREASURY SECRETARY
SAID WE WERE GOING TO IMPOSE NEW
ECONOMIC SANCTIONS ON SYRIA.
DOUG, IS THAT GOING TO
HAVE ANY MORE OF AN IMPACT?
>> THEY'RE PRETTY ISOLATED NOW,
SO I'M NOT SURE HOW MUCH MORE
IMPACT THIS WILL ACTUALLY HAVE
IN TANGIBLE TERMS, BUT, AS A
SYMBOLIC GESTURE OF, AGAIN,
WE'RE NOT JUST GOING TO PUNISH
THE POOR PILOTS ON THE GROUND
WHO WERE ON THE RECEIVING END OF
THE MISSILES BUT THE REGIME
ACTORS THEMSELVES WHO ARE
RESPONSIBLE FOR THIS STRATEGIC
DECISION, THAT, AGAIN, SENDS A
VERY, VERY STRONG MESSAGE.
AND, AGAIN, I SUSPECT THE PEOPLE
THIS IS AIMED AT PERIPHERALLY
ARE NOT SO MUCH OTHER PLAYERS IN
THE AREA BUT THE NORTH KOREANS
AND MAYBE ALSO THE IRANIANS.
THIS IS A W.M.D. MESSAGE.
>> Sreenivasan: WE TALKED
QUITE A BIT ABOUT SYRIA AND IT'S
BY NO MEANS THE ONLY COUNTRY IN
THE MIDDLE EAST; AND THERE IS
AFGHANISTAN, WHERE THE U.S. HAS
BEEN AT WAR SINCE 2001, AND THE
SPILLOVER AGAINST ISLAMIC
MILITANTS BASED IN PAKISTAN.
THERE ARE STILL 5,000 U.S.
TROOPS IN IRAQ WHERE THE WAR TO
TOPPLE SADDAM HUSSEIN BEGAN IN
2003; AND THERE ARE CONFLICTS IN
SOMALIA AND YEMEN WHERE THE
TRUMP ADMINISTRATION ESCALATED
THE U.S. PRESENCE, AIDING ONE
SIDE OR ANOTHER.
DOUG, THINKING ABOUT THIS IN THE
REGIONAL CONTEXT, DOES THIS
CHANGE THE EQUATION AT LEAST HOW
ACTORS IN THESE PLACES SEE
THE ROLE OF THE UNITED STATES?
>> WELL, TALKING TO MY FRIENDS
IN THE REGION, IT SOUNDS LIKE
THE-- THE LEADERS IN MIDDLE EAST
ARE THRILLED TO SEE THIS.
THEY'RE THRILLED TO SEE A STRONG
TRUMP ADMINISTRATION.
THE MIDDLE EAST, MOST OF THESE
REGIMES WERE NOTABLY NOT HAPPY
WITH THE LAST ADMINISTRATION.
SOME OF THEM WERE VERY HAPPY TO
SEE THIS NEW ADMINISTRATION, AND
THEY'RE HAPPY TO SEE THIS SHOW
OF STRENGTH.
BUT I THINK IN TERMS OF TRYING
TO APPLY THIS TO ALL THE PLACES
WE'RE ENGAGED IN THE REGION,
THESE ARE ALL VERY, VERY
DIFFERENT.
YOU KNOW, THE IRAQ FIGHT AGAINST
ISIS IS GOING VERY WELL.
WE CAN FAIRLY BE SAID TO BE
WINNING THERE.
AFGHANISTAN IS GOING MUCH MORE
POORLY; AND YEMEN WE'RE LARGELY
JUST SUPPORTING THE SAUDIS.
THESE ARE ALL INDIVIDUAL FIGHTS
WE HAVE TO TAKE ONE AT A TIME.
>> Sreenivasan: KIMBERLY
MARTEN, DOES THIS CHANGE
RUSSIA'S THINKING ABOUT THE FACT
THAT THE UNITED STATES IS
WILLING TO USE FORCE IN SPECIFIC
INSTANCES, ESPECIALLY WHEN
THEY'RE THINKING ABOUT EXPANDING
GEOGRAPHICALLY OR OTHER
DECISIONS THAT THEY'VE ALREADY
MADE?
>> I THINK IT MIGHT BE SENDING A
MESSAGE THERE ARE LIMITS.
THERE DOESN'T SEEM TO BE
EVIDENCE THAT THIS IS GOING TO
BECOME A NEW U.S. MILITARY
PRESENCE THAT HAS ANY KIND OF A
PERMANENT BASIS.
AND SO I DON'T THINK WE'RE
NECESSARILY GOING TO SEE THE
U.S. AND RUSSIA BECOME OUT AND
OUT MILITARY COMPETITORS AGAINST
EACH OTHER.
BUT I THINK IT DOES SEND A
MESSAGE THAT THERE ARE LIMITS.
AND IF RUSSIA SAYS THAT IT HAS
THESE ALLIES THAT ARE ITS CLIENT
STATES, IT BETTER BE ABLE TO
CONTROL WHAT THEY DO.
>> Sreenivasan: ALL RIGHT,
KIMBERLY MARTEN, DOUG OLLIVANT,
THANK YOU, BOTH.
>> THANK YOU.
>> THANK YOU, HARI.
>> Sreenivasan: FORMER PRESIDENT
GEORGE W. BUSH IS CALLING ON
CONGRESS TO CONTINUE FUNDING FOR
PEPFAR, THE PLAN HE LAUNCHED FOR
AIDS RELIEF.
IN AN OP-ED IN TODAY'S
"WASHINGTON POST," MR. BUSH SAID
SINCE THE PROGRAM BEGAN IN 2003,
MAINLY IN AFRICA:
PEPFAR ALSO SCREENS WOMEN AND
GIRLS FOR THE H.P.V. VIRUS THAT
CAUSES CERVICAL CANCER.
WITH BIPARTISAN SUPPORT, PEPFAR
RECEIVED $6.8 BILLION LAST YEAR.
WHEN IT COMES TO HUMANITARIAN
AID FOR AFRICA, TRADITIONALLY,
IT HAS MEANT TAXPAYER-FUNDED
PROGRAMS LIKE PEPFAR OR
PRIVATELY-FUNDED SHIPMENTS OF
MEDICAL SUPPLIES, FOOD AND OTHER
GOODS.
A NON-PROFIT ORGANIZATION CALLED
GIVEDIRECTLY IS PIONEERING
ANOTHER APPROACH IN EASTERN
AFRICA: GIVING CASH
UNCONDITIONALLY TO THE NEEDY.
THE LATEST PROJECT INVOLVES
PROVIDING WHAT'S CALLED A
"UNIVERSAL BASIC INCOME,"
WHEREBY EVERY ADULT IN A
DESIGNATED AREA RECEIVES A
REGULAR CASH PAYMENT.
IN TONIGHT'S SIGNATURE SEGMENT,
"NEWSHOUR WEEKEND" SPECIAL
CORRESPONDENT CHRISTOPHER
LIVESAY REPORTS FROM KENYA.
>> Reporter: MAGLINE AWINO NDIWA
LIVES IN A RURAL VILLAGE IN
WESTERN KENYA CALLED KALUANDE
SOUTH.
AS A SUBSISTENCE FARMER, SHE AND
HER HUSBAND STRUGGLE TO SUPPORT
THEIR FIVE CHILDREN.
>> (translated): MOST OF THE
MONEY THAT WE GET IS ALWAYS
SPENT ON SCHOOL FEES BECAUSE IF
WE DON'T PAY THE FEES, THEY ARE
SENT HOME.
>> Reporter: FOR YEARS, SHE'S
MADE TOUGH DECISIONS ON WHETHER
TO PAY THOSE FEES, BUY FOOD OR
IMPROVE HER TINY, MUD-THATCHED
HOME WITH ITS LEAKY TIN ROOF.
THEN, LAST YEAR, A U.S.-BASED
NONPROFIT ORGANIZATION CALLED
GIVEDIRECTLY CAME TO HER VILLAGE
AND OFFERED HER $1,000 IN CASH--
TEN TIMES HER ANNUAL EARNINGS--
AND SAID SHE COULD SPEND IT ON
WHATEVER SHE WANTED.
70% OF THE 281 FAMILIES IN THIS
VILLAGE RECEIVED CASH FROM
GIVEDIRECTLY, WHICH TARGETS
PEOPLE LIVING ON LESS THAN $1 A
DAY.
NDIWA USED HER CASH TO BUILD
THIS BIGGER HOUSE.
HOW HAS LIFE CHANGED NOW THAT
YOU'VE GOTTEN THIS CASH?
>> (translated): IT'S NOT EASY
TO LIVE WITH FIVE CHILDREN IN A
SMALL HOUSE, BUT NOW I HAVE A
GOOD HOME THAT'S NOT LEAKING AND
HAS ENOUGH SPACE TO ACCOMMODATE
ALL THE CHILDREN.
I AM HAPPY.
>> THE BIG IDEA WAS GIVING
PEOPLE MONEY TO MAKE THEM LESS
POOR.
IT ALMOST SEEMS SO OBVIOUS.
>> Reporter: ECONOMIST MICHAEL
FAYE WAS ONE OF FOUR GRADUATE
STUDENTS STUDYING DEVELOPMENT
ECONOMICS WHO CO-FOUNDED
GIVEDIRECTLY IN 2009.
UNLIKE OTHER AID GROUPS THAT
PROVIDE GOODS OR SERVICES,
NEARLY 90% OF ITS DONATIONS GO
STRAIGHT TO RECIPIENTS AS CASH.
>> WE WERE FRUSTRATED WITH MANY
OF THE SAME THINGS THAT A LOT OF
DONORS ARE FRUSTRATED WITH.
NON-PROFITS ARE OPAQUE; THE
MONEY HAS TO PASS THROUGH
MULTIPLE HANDS, AND ONLY A
FRACTION OF IT WINDS UP IN THE
HANDS OF THE POOR.
>> Reporter: FUNDED BY PRIVATE
DONORS AND FOUNDATIONS,
INCLUDING SEVERAL BASED IN
SILICON VALLEY, GIVEDIRECTLY HAS
DISTRIBUTED NEARLY $56 MILLION
ACROSS WESTERN KENYA AND UGANDA
SINCE 2011, PROVIDING UP TO
$1,000 TO 65,000 FAMILIES WITH
NO STRINGS ATTACHED.
PEOPLE USE GIVEDIRECTLY'S CASH
IN A WIDE VARIETY OF WAYS.
SYLVANUS OLWENY OLUOCH USED THE
MONEY TO BUY FOOD, CLOTHES AND
LIVESTOCK, AND BUILD THIS MODEST
NEW HOUSE.
DANIEL OMONDI ODIPO USED PART OF
HIS GIVEDIRECTLY GRANT TO PAY
HIS WIFE'S DOWRY.
AND MANY RECIPIENTS USE THE
MONEY TO START A BUSINESS.
CHICKEN BROTH, SOME CANDY.
I SEE TOOTHPASTE.
JANE AKETCH OREGE OPENED THIS
SMALL GENERAL STORE AND A BARBER
SHOP NEXT DOOR.
SO, THERE'S NOTHING KEEPING A
RECIPIENT OF THIS MONEY FROM
DOING SOMETHING WITH IT THAT THE
DONOR DOESN'T LIKE?
>> THAT'S RIGHT.
THERE'S OBVIOUSLY THINGS THAT A
LOT OF US WOULD AGREE ARE BAD--
SMOKING, ALCOHOL, AND SO ON--
BUT THERE ARE OTHER THINGS THAT
WE AS DONORS THINK ABOUT.
MAYBE WE THINK SOMEONE SHOULD
SPEND IT ON EDUCATION.
MAYBE WE THINK THEY SHOULD SPEND
IT ON A COW.
AND I THINK THERE'S A DEGREE OF
SELF-REFLECTION THAT WE SHOULD
HAVE ON WHY WE HAVE THOSE
PREFERENCES, AND WHY WE THINK
THOSE PREFERENCES ARE MORE
IMPORTANT THAN THE POOR'S
PREFERENCES.
>> Reporter: GIVEDIRECTLY'S CASH
IS DISTRIBUTED THROUGH M-PESA, A
WIDELY USED MOBILE MONEY SYSTEM
THAT ALLOWS KENYANS TO RECEIVE
AND SEND MONEY FOR A SMALL FEE.
IF A POTENTIAL CASH RECIPIENT
DOESN'T OWN A CELL PHONE,
GIVEDIRECTLY PROVIDES ONE.
THE MONEY IS GIVEN IN THREE
LUMP-SUM PAYMENTS, AND, AS PART
OF ENROLLING IN THE PROGRAM,
EVERY RECIPIENT IS VETTED IN
PERSON.
>>SABA SABA?
>> Reporter: DIANA ACHIENG MWAGA
IS A GIVEDIRECTLY FIELD OFFICER.
WHILE LEAVING DECISIONS UP TO
THE RECIPIENTS, MGAWA DOCUMENTS
HOW THEY PLAN TO SPEND THE CASH,
AND COLLECTS DATA ON THEIR LIVES
BEFORE THEY RECEIVE THE MONEY.
GIVEDIRECTLY RELIES ON OUTSIDE
RESEARCHERS TO ASSESS THE IMPACT
OF THEIR CASH-TRANSFER PROGRAM.
ONE STUDY PUBLISHED LAST YEAR ON
GIVEDIRECTLY'S WORK FOUND
RECIPIENTS INCREASED LIVESTOCK
OWNERSHIP BY 50%, REPORTED A
SIGNIFICANT DECREASE IN
DEPRESSION, AND DIDN'T SPEND
MORE ON ALCOHOL AND TOBACCO.
>> CASH TRANSFERS ARE NOT ONLY
THE FUTURE, THEY'RE THE PRESENT.
>> Reporter: WORLD BANK
ECONOMIST BERK OZLER SAYS
RESEARCH ACROSS THE GLOBE SHOWS
THE ADVANTAGES OF CASH AS A FORM
OF AID, ESPECIALLY IN THE SHORT
TERM.
>> I THINK WE HAVE MORE AND MORE
EVIDENCE THAT SUGGESTS THAT
UNLESS YOU HAVE A VERY GOOD
REASON TO GIVE PEOPLE SOMETHING
ELSE, YOU SHOULD GIVE THEM CASH
INSTEAD.
>> Reporter: WHILE CERTAIN
BENEFITS OF CASH HAVE BEEN
WIDELY STUDIED, GIVEDIRECTLY
STILL HAS TO CONVINCE THE PEOPLE
IT'S TRYING TO HELP, MANY OF
WHOM ARE SKEPTICAL.
FIELD OFFICER DIANA ACHIENG
MWAGA HAS HAD TO KNOCK DOWN
RUMORS OF TIES TO SINISTER
RELIGIOUS FORCES.
MAGLINE NDIWA SAYS, UNLIKE HER,
SOME PEOPLE IN HER VILLAGE
REFUSED THE MONEY.
>> (translated): THEY WERE
SAYING SO MANY THINGS, THAT WE
WILL BE FORCED TO GIVE UP OUR
CHILDREN, THAT WE WILL DIE.
>> Reporter: MARY AKOTH IS CO-
WIVES WITH NDIWA, MARRIED TO THE
SAME MAN, A COMMON PRACTICE IN
THIS PART OF KENYA.
WHEN YOU FIRST HEARD ABOUT
GIVEDIRECTLY, WHAT DID YOU
THINK?
>> (translated): I WAS NOT
HAPPY BECAUSE MONEY THAT YOU
HAVE NOT WORKED FOR, YOU CANNOT
BE COMFORTABLE TAKING IT.
>> Reporter: THE KENYAN
GOVERNMENT ALSO RUNS CASH GRANT
PROGRAMS FOR MORE THAN 700,000
HOUSEHOLDS WITH VULNERABLE
CHILDREN, THE ELDERLY AND THE
DISABLED, PROVIDING MONTHLY
STIPENDS OF ABOUT $20.
GLADYS WANGA IS A MEMBER OF
KENYA'S PARLIAMENT.
ARE YOU LEARNING ANYTHING FROM
GIVEDIRECTLY?
>> YES.
I THINK ONE OF THE LESSONS THAT
THE GOVERNMENT PROGRAMS CAN
LEARN FROM GIVEDIRECTLY IS
TRANSPARENCY AND JUST A LEVEL
PLAYING FIELD FOR EVERYONE.
AND JUST A TOOL THAT VETS.
AND WHEN YOU... IF YOU MEET THE
CRITERIA, YOU'RE GOOD TO GO.
>> Reporter: WANGA REPRESENTS
HOMA BAY, AN AREA IN WESTERN
KENYA WHERE GIVEDIRECTLY HAS
GIVEN OUT CASH SINCE 2015.
HAVE THEY FOLLOWED THROUGH ON
WHAT THEY CLAIMED THEY WERE ABLE
TO ACHIEVE?
>> YES, THEY'VE CERTAINLY
FOLLOWED THROUGH.
LIVES HAVE CHANGED.
THEY PROMISE WHAT THEY DO.
THEY DON'T PROMISE WHAT THEY
CAN'T DO.
>> Reporter: GIVEDIRECTLY HAS
BEEN MAKING LUMP-SUM PAYMENTS TO
THE POOREST INDIVIDUALS IN KENYA
FOR YEARS, BUT WHAT WOULD HAPPEN
IF ENTIRE VILLAGES WERE
RECIPIENTS?
THAT'S WHAT GIVEDIRECTLY WANTS
TO FIND OUT WITH AN EXPERIMENT
STRETCHING 12 YEARS.
THE IDEA IS TO PROVIDE WHAT'S
KNOWN AS A "UNIVERSAL BASIC
INCOME," UNIVERSALLY PROVIDING
EVERY ADULT IN A VILLAGE ENOUGH
CASH TO COVER THE BASIC COST OF
LIVING.
THE CONCEPT OF A UNIVERSAL BASIC
INCOME HAS BEEN DEBATED IN BOTH
POOR AND RICH COUNTRIES AROUND
THE WORLD.
IN WEALTHIER ECONOMIES, IT'S
BEEN PROPOSED AS A REPLACEMENT
FOR SAFETY NET PROGRAMS, A WAY
TO COMBAT GROWING INCOME
INEQUALITY AND EVEN TO ADDRESS
JOB LOSSES EXPECTED FROM
AUTOMATION.
OTHER COUNTRIES ARE ALREADY
EXPERIMENTING WITH THE IDEA.
IN FINLAND, THE GOVERNMENT HAS
BEGUN A UNIVERSAL BASIC INCOME
TRIAL FOR SOME OF ITS CITIZENS.
AND GOVERNMENTS IN CANADA,
SCOTLAND AND THE NETHERLANDS
HAVE ALSO PROPOSED TRIALS.
AND IN THE UNITED STATES, A
PRIVATE ORGANIZATION HAS
PROPOSED A TRIAL IN OAKLAND,
CALIFORNIA.
GIVEDIRECTLY'S $30 MILLION
PROGRAM IN KENYA WILL BE THE
LARGEST AND LONGEST EXPERIMENT
OF ITS KIND.
RECIPIENTS WILL RECEIVE ABOUT
$22 A MONTH, WHICH IS CLOSE TO
75 CENTS A DAY.
LAST OCTOBER, IT STARTED
PROVIDING A BASIC INCOME IN THIS
VILLAGE TO TEST THE MODEL.
KENNEDY ASWAN ABAGI IS THE
VILLAGE'S ELECTED "ELDER."
>> (translated): 12 YEARS IS A
LONG TIME.
HOPEFULLY, BY THAT TIME,
EVERYBODY SHALL HAVE INVESTED IN
SOMETHING THAT CAN SUPPORT THEIR
FAMILIES, LIKE REARING LIVESTOCK
OR FARMING CROPS, SO THAT THEIR
LIVES CAN CONTINUE SMOOTHLY.
>> Reporter: HIS VILLAGE IS ONE
OF 300 THAT WILL BE PART OF THE
UNIVERSAL BASIC INCOME
EXPERIMENT.
THE VILLAGES WILL BE RANDOMLY
DIVIDED INTO FOUR GROUPS.
SOME WILL GET LUMP-SUM
TRANSFERS; SOME WILL GET MONEY
FOR 12 YEARS; SOME FOR TWO
YEARS; AND OTHER VILLAGES WILL
GET NOTHING, ACTING AS
"CONTROLS" TO SEE THE IMPACT OF
THE BASIC INCOME.
>> HOW MUCH INCOME DOES SHE
USUALLY MAKE IN A MONTH?
>> Reporter: PRINCETON
UNIVERSITY ECONOMIST ALAN
KRUEGER IS ONE OF THE
INDEPENDENT RESEARCHERS THAT
WILL ANALYZE DATA FROM THE
BASIC-INCOME EXPERIMENT.
HE WAS VISITING THE PILOT
VILLAGE ALONG WITH GIVEDIRECTLY
CO-FOUNDER MICHAEL FAYE.
SO, THIS IS THE QUESTIONNAIRE
THAT RECIPIENTS GO THROUGH?
>> THAT'S RIGHT.
>> Reporter: IT'S PRETTY
WEIGHTY.
HOW LONG DOES IT TAKE TO
ACTUALLY GET THROUGH ALL THESE
QUESTIONS?
>> AT THE MOMENT, IT'S TAKING
JUST UNDER THREE HOURS, AND
WE'RE TRYING TO CUT IT DOWN.
PARTICIPANTS WILL BE ASKED ABOUT
EVERYTHING FROM THEIR HOPES FOR
THE FUTURE TO THEIR INCOMES.
YOU DON'T JUST FOCUS ON A SINGLE
OUTCOME, YOU HAVE TO LOOK AT A
RANGE OF OUTCOMES.
>> HOW DID YOU REACT THE FIRST
TIME YOU HEARD ABOUT IT?
>> Reporter: ALTHOUGH WORLDS
APART, FAYE BELIEVES LESSONS
FROM THE UNIVERSAL BASIC-INCOME
EXPERIMENT IN KENYA WILL BE
RELEVANT TO EUROPE AND THE U.S.
THAT MIGHT SEEM LIKE APPLES AND
ORANGES TO A LOT OF PEOPLE,
KENYA COMPARED TO THE U.S.
>> IT IS ABSOLUTELY APPLES AND
ORANGES, AND YOU COULD ALSO SAY
DETROIT AND OAKLAND ARE ALSO
APPLES AND ORANGES.
AND AS AN ECONOMIST, THIS IS WHY
YOU DO THE EXPERIMENT MANY
TIMES, TO LEARN WHAT IS
UNIVERSAL AND WHAT IS LOCALLY
SPECIFIC.
BUT YOU CERTAINLY NEED TO PICK
SOMEWHERE TO START.
>> I THINK THERE ARE ASPECTS TO
ECONOMIC BEHAVIOR THAT CUT
ACROSS CULTURES, BUT WE'LL SEE
HOW MUCH WE CAN EXTRAPOLATE FROM
THE FIELDS HERE IN KENYA TO
OTHER CONTEXTS.
>> Reporter: WORLD BANK
ECONOMIST BERK OZLER HAS DOUBTS
ABOUT HOW MUCH RESEARCHERS WILL
LEARN FROM THE BASIC-INCOME
EXPERIMENT IN BOTH RICH AND POOR
COUNTRIES.
>> IF WE'RE TALKING ABOUT THE
U.S. OR FINLAND OR SWITZERLAND
OR SOMETHING LIKE THAT, THE
CONTEXT AND THE AMOUNTS WILL BE
SO DIFFERENT.
AND THEN, ON THE DEVELOPING
COUNTRY SIDE, I'M WORRIED THAT
THE AMOUNT IS TOO LARGE.
>> Reporter: OZLER FEARS THAT A
COUNTRY LIKE KENYA COULD NEVER
AFFORD TO IMPLEMENT A PROGRAM
LIKE GIVEDIRECTLY'S FOR ALL OF
ITS CITIZENS.
HE WOULD ALSO LIKE TO SEE THE
EXPERIMENT GO FURTHER AND TEST
GIVEDIRECTLY'S CASH PAYMENTS
AGAINST OTHER TYPES OF
CHARITABLE AID IN RURAL AFRICA,
SUCH AS VACCINES, MOSQUITO NETS
TO PREVENT MALARIA OR FREE
LIVESTOCK.
>> I'M NOT GOING TO CONVINCE YOU
THAT CASH TRANSFERS ARE BETTER.
YOU'RE NOT GOING TO CONVINCE ME
THAT GIVING PEOPLE CHICKENS IS
BETTER.
SO LET'S JUST PUT IT TO THE
TEST.
>> Reporter: HOW DO YOU MEASURE
SUCCESS IN A PROGRAM LIKE THIS?
>> IT'S ALMOST HARD AT SOME
BASIC LEVEL FOR IT NOT TO BE
SUCCESSFUL SIMPLY BECAUSE YOU'RE
GIVING PEOPLE THAT ARE LIVING ON
50 CENTS, 60 CENTS A DAY MONEY
THAT WILL TAKE THEM ABOVE THE
POVERTY LINE.
THE BROADER SUCCESS IS SHIFTING
THE SECTOR TO A PLACE THAT IS
BASED AROUND EVIDENCE, THAT IS
TRANSPARENT AND HONEST, AND PUTS
THE RECIPIENT AT THE CENTER OF
AID PROGRAMS AND NOT JUST THE
DONOR.
>> Reporter: AID RECIPIENT
KENNEDY ASWAN ABAGI SAYS HE
PLANS TO USE HIS CASH GIFTS TO
EXPAND HIS CARPENTRY BUSINESS
AND INVEST IN MORE LIVESTOCK,
AND HE'S THINKING LONG-TERM.
>> (translated): OUR ONLY HOPE
IS THAT GIVEDIRECTLY WILL
FULFILL ITS PROMISE OF
CONTINUING TO SEND US THE MONEY
FOR 12 YEARS WITHOUT
INTERRUPTION SO THAT WE CAN
CONTINUE INVESTING IN PROJECTS
THAT WILL SUSTAIN US AFTERWARDS.
>> Sreenivasan: ON EARTH DAY
LATER THIS MONTH, THE NATION'S
CAPITAL WILL SEE A "MARCH FOR
SCIENCE."
WHERE DO YOU STAND?
TELL US ON OUR WEB SITE AT
www.pbs.org/newshour.
>>THIS IS PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND,
SATURDAY.
>> Sreenivasan: SWEDISH POLICE
SAY THE MAN WHO SLAMMED A
HIJACKED BEER TRUCK INTO
SHOPPERS AND A DEPARTMENT STORE
IN STOCKHOLM YESTERDAY IS
A 39-YEAR-OLD NATIVE OF
UZBEKISTAN.
POLICE SAY THEY HAVE NOT RULED
OUT WHETHER OTHERS WERE INVOLVED
BUT HAVE NOT FOUND LINKS TO
EXTREMIST GROUPS.
FLAGS FLEW AT HALF-STAFF TODAY
FOR THE FOUR PEOPLE KILLED IN
THE ATTACK.
15 OTHERS WERE INJURED, AND TEN
REMAIN HOSPITALIZED.
PRIME MINISTER STEFAN LOFVEN
VISITED THE ATTACK SITE, AS DID
CROWN PRINCESS VICTORIA.
IN INDIA, POLICE HAVE ARRESTED
THE ALLEGED MASTERMIND OF A
MASSIVE CALL CENTER SCAM THAT
BILKED THOUSANDS OF AMERICANS
OUT OF $300 MILLION.
POLICE ARRESTED 24-YEAR-OLD
SAGAR THAKKAR, SEEN HERE WEARING
A BLACK HOOD, TODAY AT THE
MUMBAI AIRPORT.
HE FACES CRIMINAL CHARGES IN
INDIA AND THE UNITED STATES.
THAKKAR'S CALL CENTER WORKERS
ALLEGEDLY IMPERSONATED I.R.S.
AND IMMIGRATION AGENTS AND
THREATENED VICTIMS WITH ARRESTS,
FINES AND DEPORTATIONS UNLESS
THEY MADE PAYMENTS.
IN SPAIN, THE BASQUE SEPARATIST
GROUP ETA APPEARS TO BE ENDING
ITS DECADES-LONG CAMPAIGN
AGAINST SPAIN BY SURRENDERING
ITS WEAPONS.
TODAY, ETA DIRECTED POLICE
ACROSS THE BORDER IN FRANCE TO
SITES WHERE IT HAD HIDDEN GUNS,
AMMUNITION AND EXPLOSIVES.
THE SPANISH GOVERNMENT CALLED ON
ETA TO GO FURTHER BY DISBANDING
AND ASKING FORGIVENESS FROM
FAMILIES OF 800 PEOPLE KILLED IN
ITS ATTACKS.
ETA DECLARED A TRUCE SIX YEARS
AGO.
SOUTH KOREAN AUTOMAKER HYUNDAI
IS RECALLING ABOUT 1.5 MILLION
CARS AND S.U.V.s IN THE U.S.,
CANADA AND SOUTH KOREA TO FIX AN
ENGINE PROBLEM.
THE COMPANY SAYS A MANUFACTURING
DEFECT COULD MAKE ENGINES STALL
AND INCREASE THE RISK OF A
CRASH, THOUGH HYUNDAI SAYS IT'S
RECEIVED NO SUCH CRASH REPORTS.
THE RECALL COVERS POPULAR MODELS
LIKE THE 2013 AND 2014 HYUNDAI
SANTE FE SPORT S.U.V. AND SONATA
MIDSIZE CARS, AND VARIOUS KIA
MODELS MADE BETWEEN 2011 AND
2014.
A COMPLETE LIST IS POSTED ON OUR
WEB SITE, www.pbs.org/newshour.
>> Sreenivasan: FINALLY, THE
ROCK 'N' ROLL HALL OF FAME
INDUCTED ITS NEWEST CLASS LAST
NIGHT IN NEW YORK IN A CEREMONY
THAT OPENED WITH A TRIBUTE TO
THE LATE CHUCK BERRY, THE FIRST
ARTIST EVER INDUCTED.
THE SIX HONOREES RANGED FROM 76-
YEAR-OLD FOLK LEGEND JOAN BAEZ
TO THE LATE RAPPER TUPAC SHAKUR.
ALSO INDUCTED WERE SEATTLE-BASED
PEARL JAM, SAN FRANCISCO'S
JOURNEY, AND THE BRITISH GROUPS
YES AND ELECTRIC LIGHT
ORCHESTRA.
THAT'S ALL FOR THIS EDITION OF
PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
I'M HARI SREENIVASAN.
HAVE A GOOD NIGHT.